# Exercise 2.5

## Problem

Let $\Omega = [0, 1]$, and let $\mathcal{F}_3$ consist of all countable subsets
of $\Omega$, and all subsets of $\Omega$ having countable complement.

a) Show that $\mathcal{F}_3$ is a $\sigma$-algebra.

b) Let us define $P(A) = 0$ if $A$ is countable, and $P(A) = 1$ if $A$ has a
   countable complement. Is $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}_3, P)$ a legitimate
   probability space?

## Solution

a) For $\mathcal{F}_3$ to be a $\sigma$-algebra, it must satisfy the following
   three properties:

- $\emptyset \in \mathcal{F}_3$:
   Empty set is countable, so it is in $\mathcal{F}_3$. ✓
- $A \in \mathcal{F}_3 \implies A^C \in \mathcal{F}_3$:
   If $A$ is in $\mathcal{F}_3$, then either $A$ is countable or $A^C$ is. If
   $A = (A^C)^C$ is countable, $A^C$ is in $\mathcal{F}_3$. Otherwise, $A^C$
   has to be countable and also in $\mathcal{F}_3$. ✓

- $A_1, A_2, \ldots \in \mathcal{F}\_3 \implies \cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i \in \mathcal{F}\_3$:

If all $A_i$ are countable, $\cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i$ is countable as well and
therefore in $\mathcal{F}_3$. Otherwise, at least one of the $A_i$ has a
countable complement. In this case,

$$
(\cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i)^C = \cap_{i=1}^\infty A_i^C
$$

is countable and $\cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i$ is in $\mathcal{F}_3$, because its
complement is countable. ✓

All these properties hold, so $\mathcal{F}_3$ is a $\sigma$-algebra.

$$
\tag*{$\blacksquare$}
$$

b) For $P$ to be a probability measure, it has to be a measure and have a
   total measure of $1$.

Two properties needed for function to be a measure are:

- $P(\emptyset) = 0$:
   Empty set is countable, so its measure is $0$. ✓

- $P(\cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i) = \sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty P(A_i)$ for disjoint
  $A_i \in \mathcal{F}_3$:

If all $A_i$ are countable, $\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty P(A_i) = \infty \cdot 0 = 0$.
At the same time, their union is countable, so $P(\cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i) = 0$,
satisfying the countable additivity condition. On the other hand, if at least
one $A_i$ has a countable complement,
$(\cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i)^C = \cap_{i=1}^\infty A_i^C$ is countable and
$P(\cup_{i=1}^\infty A_i) = 1$, while $\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty P(A_i)$
equals number of sets $A_i$ with countable complement.

Because all these sets need to be disjoint, it turns out that it is not
possible to have more than one set with countable complement. Let $A_i$ and
$A_j$ be two sets with countable complement. Their intersection should be an
empty set:

$$
A_i \cap A_j = \emptyset,
$$

but complementing both sides, we get:

$$
A_i^C \cup A_j^C = \Omega.
$$

These complements are countable, so their union is countable as well. But
$\Omega$ is not countable, so this is a contradiction, giving
$\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty P(A_i) = 0$, satisfying countable additivity as well. ✓

We showed that $P$ is a measure. We also know that $P(\Omega) = 1$, because
$\Omega$ has a countable complement - empty set $\emptyset$. Therefore, $P$ is
a probability measure.

$$
\tag*{$\blacksquare$}
$$
